make ready "Project TOML Converter RFC" (#2)
haliliceylan/rfcs: text/0000-project-toml-converter.md

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

- This feature has similarities with the "prepare" phase that has been discussed previously (see #555). But it is much smaller in scope. Potentially, the binary described in this RFC could eventually take on more responsibilities and look more like "prepare". But that is out of scope for this RFC.

- Project Descriptor (aka project.toml) is a file which describes behavior related to buildpacks. It is non-trivial for platform operators to upgrade support for different versions of project.toml. So with this feature we are giving to developers the ability to use any version of project.toml knowing that the platform can always support it. At the same time we are giving to operators the convenience of only having to know about one schema at a time for project.toml.

- What is the expected outcome?

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

The Project TOML Converter is a CLI tool that will ship alongside the lifecycle. It has only one responsibility at this time, to support conversion between schemas.

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

> Example Project.TOML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example Project.TOML with 0.1 schema
```

Reviewer: Could we also give an Example Project.TOML with 0.2 schema?

- Do nothing, hope everything will be fine (we can leave as it is). We think it's too hard for platform operators to support multiple versions of project.toml.
- Having the translator binary translate from e.g., project.toml schema 0.1 -> project.toml schema 0.2. The platform API already represents the contract between the lifecycle and the platform, so it makes more sense than "project descriptor schema -> project descriptor schema" translation.. 

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art 

Discuss prior art, both the good and bad.

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What will the platform schema for project.toml look like?
- Out of scope: parts of project.toml that aren't relevant to the platform api (like setting env vars)

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
The new platform schema could look something like:
```
[project]
id = "<string>"
version = "<string>"

[build]
builder = "cnbs/sample-builder:bionic"
include = ["<string>"]
exclude = ["<string>"]

[[build.buildpacks]]
id = "io.buildpacks/java"
version = "1.0"

[metadata]
# all metadatas here
```

> *Here is the namespace conversions*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Here are the namespace conversions*
```

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Project TOML Converter
- Start Date: 10 Aug 2021
- Author(s): haliliceylan
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> The idea is to ship a binary with the lifecycle that would be responsible for translating project.toml 0.2 into something that the lifecycle knows the platform can understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea is to ship a binary with the lifecycle that would be responsible for translating project.toml from the schema defined in the project descriptor extension spec into something that the lifecycle knows the platform can understand i.e., a schema defined in the platform spec.
```

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

> * __project descriptor__ - the [`project.toml`](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/extensions/project-descriptor.md) extension specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* __project descriptor__ - a file that is included in the application directory to configure various behavior related to buildpacks; for more information, see the [`project.toml`](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/extensions/project-descriptor.md) extension specification
```

Reviewer: It would be good to also define `CNB_PLATFORM_API` - this determines the contract between the lifecycle and the platform

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> - Actually this feature, sounds like part of prepare-phase. But this is so simple and we can build fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This feature has similarities with the "prepare" phase that has been discussed previously (see XXX). But it is much smaller in scope. Potentially, the binary described in this RFC could eventually take on more responsibilities and look more like "prepare". But that is out of scope for this RFC.
```

Reviewer: (would be good to add the link to Joe's RFC version)

> - Sometimes Operators has some issues with different project.toml files. As you know system operator can not easily upgrade their system packages, pack and buildpacks. So with this feature we are giving to developers able to use always latest version of project.toml. In same time we are giving to operators able to stable update scheduling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is non-trivial for platform operators to upgrade support for different versions of project.toml (NA: examples would help here... what does project.toml do? What does a platform have to do?). So with this feature we are giving to developers the ability to use any version of project.toml knowing that the platform can always support it. At the same time we are giving to operators the convenience of only having to know about one schema at a time for project.toml.
```

- What is the expected outcome?

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

> The Project TOML Converter is a CLI tool. seperated from pack and buildpack. It has only one responsibility, maintain project descriptor versions. support conversion between versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Project TOML Converter is a CLI tool that will ship alongside the lifecycle. It has only one responsibility at this time, to support conversion between schemas.
```

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

This is the technical portion of the RFC, where you explain the design in sufficient detail.

> The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

Reviewer: Let's give an example of project.toml ([this](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/extensions/project-descriptor.md#schema) could help). We should highlight the parts that are "platform" specific - i.e., things that a buildpack CANNOT do. Then we might give an example of how we want the schema to look in the platform spec.

Author: i pasted example projeect.toml but i did not get it corrrectly. which keys related with platform directly.

Author: i pasted example projeect.toml but i did not get it corrrectly. which keys related with platform directly.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this?

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

> - What other designs have been considered?

Reviewer: Some that I can remember... 
* having the lifecycle process project.toml directly (some version of "prepare")
* do nothing, hope everything will be fine
* having the translator binary translate from e.g., project.toml schema 0.1 -> project.toml schema 0.2

Author: `having the translator binary translate from e.g., project.toml schema 0.1 -> project.toml schema 0.2` actually this is what we are doing right now, right ? so is it not a alternative ?

> - Why is this proposal the best?

Reviewer: Needs some word-smithing, but:
* we haven't aligned on what "prepare" should do; need to start slow and incrementally
* we think it's too hard for platform operators to support multiple versions of project.toml
* the platform API already represents the contract between the lifecycle and the platform, so it makes more sense than "project descriptor schema -> project descriptor schema" translation.

> - What is the impact of not doing this?

Reviewer: We think it'll be a headache for either developers ("I just changed my project.toml, why did everything just break?!") or operators ("I just can't keep track of all these project.toml versions!"). Probably this could be said more professionally :)

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Discuss prior art, both the good and bad.

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What parts of the design do you expect to be resolved before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to be resolved through implementation of the feature?

> - What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What will the platform schema for project.toml look like?
- Out of scope: parts of project.toml that aren't relevant to the platform api (like setting env vars)
```

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
[spec-changes]: #spec-changes
Does this RFC entail any proposed changes to the core specifications or extensions? If so, please document changes here.
Examples of a spec. change might be new lifecycle flags, new `buildpack.toml` fields, new fields in the buildpackage label, etc.

> This section is not intended to be binding, but as discussion of an RFC unfolds, if spec changes are necessary, they should be documented here.

Reviewer: Maybe give an example of what the platform schema COULD look like.

Author: i will ask some question on slack

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Project TOML Converter
- Start Date: 10 Aug 2021
- Author(s): haliliceylan, natalieparellano
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

The idea is to ship a binary with the lifecycle that would be responsible for translating project.toml from the schema defined in the project descriptor extension spec into something that the lifecycle knows the platform can understand i.e., a schema defined in the platform spec.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

* __project descriptor__ - a file that is included in the application directory to configure various behavior related to buildpacks; for more information, see the [`project.toml`](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/extensions/project-descriptor.md) extension specification

> * __CNB_PLATFORM_API__ The Project TOML Converter will use the `CNB_PLATFORM_API` environment variable to decide which API to implement. For now, if `CNB_PLATFORM_API` is not supplied, platform API 0.3 (the currently implemented API) will be assumed, to avoid breaking existing platforms that do not currently set this environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* __CNB_PLATFORM_API__ The Project TOML Converter will use the `CNB_PLATFORM_API` environment variable to decide the target schema. The `CNB_PLATFORM_API` environment variable is set by the platform in the lifecycle's execution environment. Version 0.3 is assumed if it is not set.
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

- This feature has similarities with the "prepare" phase that has been discussed previously (see #555). But it is much smaller in scope. Potentially, the binary described in this RFC could eventually take on more responsibilities and look more like "prepare". But that is out of scope for this RFC.

> - It is non-trivial for platform operators to upgrade support for different versions of project.toml. Project Descriptor is a file which describe behavior related to buildpacks. Platform operators need to give these behaviors according to developer app requests. So with this feature we are giving to developers the ability to use any version of project.toml knowing that the platform can always support it. At the same time we are giving to operators the convenience of only having to know about one schema at a time for project.toml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Project Descriptor (aka project.toml) is a file which describes behavior related to buildpacks. It is non-trivial for platform operators to upgrade support for different versions of project.toml. So with this feature we are giving to developers the ability to use any version of project.toml knowing that the platform can always support it. At the same time we are giving to operators the convenience of only having to know about one schema at a time for project.toml.
```

- What is the expected outcome?

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

The Project TOML Converter is a CLI tool that will ship alongside the lifecycle. It has only one responsibility at this time, to support conversion between schemas.

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

Example Project.TOML
```
[project]
id = "io.buildpacks.my-app"

> version = "0.1"

Reviewer: Let's ask Javier in Buildpacks Slack how the information in this table is used. I'm not sure I have the latest.

Reviewer: Is pack reading the data in this table and putting it in this file? https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/platform.md#project-metadatatoml-toml

[build]

> include = [

Reviewer: Platform concern

Reviewer: Or maybe buildpack concern...

    "cmd/",
    "go.mod",
    "go.sum",
    "*.go"
]

> [[build.buildpacks]]

Reviewer: Platform concern

id = "io.buildpacks/java"
version = "1.0"

[[build.buildpacks]]
id = "io.buildpacks/nodejs"
version = "1.0"

> 

Reviewer: Let's add `[[build.env]]` here (buildpack concern).

> [metadata]

Reviewer: Platform concern

foo = "bar"

[metadata.fizz]
buzz = ["a", "b", "c"]
```

> TODO: Which keys are platform specific ? idk maybe metadata or buildpacks order. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
(see above)

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> Why should we *not* do this?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why should we *not* do this?

- Another binary to maintain
```

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

> - having the lifecycle process project.toml directly (like prepare phase see: #555). Prepare is not only for this problem, is kinda big and have a lot of responsibility. This RFC Topic is only focusing this problem so can be done quick and well tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Having the lifecycle process project.toml directly (like prepare phase see: #555). This RFC is only focusing on the upgrade problem so that it can be done quickly.
```

> - do nothing, hope everything will be fine (We can leave as it is). We think it's too hard for platform operators to support multiple versions of project.toml. The platform API already represents the contract between the lifecycle and the platform, so it makes more sense than "project descriptor schema -> project descriptor schema" translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do nothing, hope everything will be fine (we can leave as it is). We think it's too hard for platform operators to support multiple versions of project.toml.
```

> - having the translator binary translate from e.g., project.toml schema 0.1 -> project.toml schema 0.2 (actually this RFC). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Having the translator binary translate from e.g., project.toml schema 0.1 -> project.toml schema 0.2. The platform API already represents the contract between the lifecycle and the platform, so it makes more sense than "project descriptor schema -> project descriptor schema" translation.. 
```

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art 

Discuss prior art, both the good and bad.

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What will the platform schema for project.toml look like?
- Out of scope: parts of project.toml that aren't relevant to the platform api (like setting env vars)

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)

> new platform schema look ?

Reviewer: Here's the 0.1 schema: https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/extensions/project-descriptor.md#schema

Here's the 0.2 schema: https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/extensions/project-descriptor%2F0.2/extensions/project-descriptor.md#example

Could we come up with a platform schema that combines the platform elements of both schemas? The simpler, the better!

- Out of scope: parts of project.toml that aren't relevant to the platform api (like setting env vars)

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)

> new platform schema look something like that;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new platform schema could look something like:
```
